Data analysis support
Helping you to bridge skill gaps in your research with the Data 
Analysis Service.
On this page:
Overview   
Who we are   
How we can help   
Contact us   
Overview
Data are integral to modern research. Reading, making sense of, 
analysing, visualising or publishing your data are more 
challenging than ever. Data are developing and growing, and it is 
important to use the right tools and methods.
We can support you in using cutting-edge technology or science in
your research.
Who we are
We are a team of data scientists, data engineers and statisticians 
who understand the research environment and its processes.
We have experience and knowledge in a range of tools and topics 
in the field of data analysis to help you overcome challenges you 
may be facing in your research.
How we can help
Consultation
The Data Analysis Service offers friendly one-to-one consultations 
to all researchers. We aim to give you the best advice and support 
for your specific challenge. If we can't help, we will help you to 
find someone who can or point you in the right direction for 
additional support.
Training
We also offer training in a range of core skills and 
programming and self-paced learning and support to help you 
enhance your skills and develop your career.
Collaboration
Finally, we offer the chance to collaborate with a member of the 
team by providing staffing to your grants. Depending on 
availability, we can provide a staff member for up to 50% of a full 
time role.
If you are seeking this support, it is essential that you contact us 
before submitting your funding application. This is to ensure that 
staff time is costed in a way that:
Enables us to allocate people once the project is awarded
Ensures that an appropriate amount of time is costed for the 
aspirations of the project
Enables us to plan workload across a large team involved 
with many projects
We can normally provide effort with the right skills, but
sometimes we need to ask for compromise on start and end dates, 
or proportions of staff time.
Research Software Engineering Sheffield - what we do
We would like to collaborate with you to help improve your 
research software in a range of areas. Supporting the entire 
University, we have collaborators in every faculty and have 
supported researchers in a range of subject areas including 
engineering, mathematics, computer science, biology, linguistics, 
physics, chemistry and geography.
Research Software Engineering
We can help you take your computational workflow to the next 
level –making it more automated, robust, open, accessible, user 
friendly and reproducible.
Increasing research impact through software
We believe that it is possible to increase the impact of your 
research by leveraging the research software you developed to 
make it possible. We can help you make your software open, 
citable and discoverable.
Faster code
We can work with you to optimise your code using a range of 
hardware and software technologies. R, Python, OpenMP, CUDA, 
C++, C, Fortran, MATLAB, Mathematica, and more - we have 
proven experience in helping researchers get results more quickly.
In some cases, we can provide significant speed-ups in just a few 
days.
GPU computing
We have specialists in GPU computing who can assist you with 
accelerating your computational problems using this relatively 
new technology. We can also help you learn more about deep 
learning, the powerful new machine learning technique that uses 
GPUs to solve complex data science problems.
As part of our GPU computing at University of Sheffield initiative, 
we have a number of RSE team members who are Deep Learning 
Institute accredited trainers who run courses which aim to teach 
how to use GPUs and help you gain access to hardware.
We also specialise in the use of agent based modeling on GPUs 
using FLAME or FLAME GPU to perform large scale simulations.
High Performance Computing (HPC)
We collaborate with a range of partners including IT Services, N8, 
Archer and Microsoft to provide you with HPC support on local, 
regional, national and cloud-based facilities.
Locally, we assist IT Services in supporting users on the 
University’s HPC clusters, Stanage and Bessemer. We are major 
contributors to their documentation system and can help you with 
software installation, training and advice on how to make 
maximum use out of these HPC resources that are free to all 
members of The University of Sheffield.
We work with the UK National Supercomputing service, ARCHER2
as HPC Champions. Our role is to advise users on the access of 
appropriate computational resources, and in supporting these 
users to access and exploit these resources appropriately.
Grant support
We have a proven track record in working with PIs to obtain 
funding for dedicated Research Software Engineering posts and 
can offer assistance to you for your next grant application.
Working with organisations such as the Software Sustainability 
Institute and the UK community of Research Software Engineers, 
we engage with funding providers to demonstrate the importance 
of research software engineers in modern research.
Supporting lecturers
We work with University of Sheffield lecturers to assist them in 
leveraging modern research software in their teaching.
A recent success story in this area is the work we did with Dr 
Marta Milo of the Department of Biomedical Science in the 
development of the BMS353 module. Modern interactive, cloud-
based, open-source technologies were combined with innovative 
teaching methodologies to develop a highly successful course.
We give talks and seminars on the use of research software in 
teaching -an example of which is the talk on Project Jupyter and 
SageMathCloud at the 2016 Chemical Engineering teaching away-
day.
Support of site licensed RSE software
The University of Sheffield’s IT department, IT Services, invests 
heavily in the provision of best-in-class commercial software 
applications for the benefit of the University’s students and 
researchers. We work with IT Services and software vendors such 
as Mathworks, Microsoft, Wolfram Research, Intel, NVIDIA, 
Maplesoft and NAG to provide training and support to members of
the University to help maximise the impact of these investments.
Training, outreach and education
The group is involved in a range of training and outreach 
activities including Code Cafe, Software Carpentry and a full 
module in Parallel computing with GPUs.
Expertise
Areas of expertise within the team include:
code optimisation and performance
reproducibility and embedding good software engineering 
practice with your project or team
GPU computing and Deep Learning
statistical analysis and data visualisation
High Performance Computing for 
local/national/international/cloud systems
general software development
development of impact case studies
consultancy
training
education delivery and support
Research Computing Training
Modern researchers require a certain level of technical proficiency. This 
encompasses tasks like executing simulations, conducting extensive 
computations, data manipulation and analysis, and even streamlining 
routine chores such as renaming and relocating data. Sadly, not every 
researcher has the chance to acquire these technical skills. Our goal is 
to address this gap by providing programming skill enhancement 
opportunities for any researcher interested. We provide 
the listed training opportunities, available for all staff and 
postgraduate students within the University of Sheffield.
Programming Fundamentals
Python Programming 1      (Online only)   
Python Programming 2      (Online only)   
Matlab Programming 1   
Matlab Programming 2   
Advanced Programming
Object Oriented Programming with Python   
Python Profiling and Optimisation   
Data Science (Python)
Python for Data Science 1   
Python for Data Science 2   
Temporal Analysis in Python   
Basics of AI for Natural Science (Python)
Basics of AI1:   
Supervised Machine Learning
Basics of AI      2:   
Unsupervised Machine Learning
Basics of AI 3: Neural Networks   
Domain-Specific Programming
Bioinformatics Training Course List   
Domain-Specific AI
Deep Learning Demystified:   
Foundations for Non-Computer Scientist
Introducing AI into Research   
Machine Learning for Speech and Signal Processing   
High Performance Computing
Introduction to Linux   
High-Performance Computing   
FAIR²  for research software
Better software for better research: Introduction to the FAIR    
training programme
Software lifecycle planning   
Version control   
Software design   
Testing and Continuous Integration   
Documentation   
Reproducible computational environments   
Packaging   
Publishing a software paper in JOSS   
Research software
See the research software applications and software development 
platforms we provide and support. Our support levels vary from 
comprehensive to best efforts, but we will always try to help where
we can.
Central core applications
Licences
Some software options need a licence. You can purchase a licence across 
campus.
We will provide
licences
instructions for access
guidance to getting started
documentation and training, in partnership with software vendors
Software will be updated regularly and multiple versions maintained.
Floating licences
If software has a floating licence, this means there are restrictions on the
number of users who can access it at a time.
Because of this, we need to maintain a licence-serving operation and 
users need to specify the licence server when installing this software.
We will provide installation instructions to access floating licences. This 
is usually via a licence-server name and a port number.
Software options
A    C    G    I    M    N    P    R    S    T
A
Abaqus
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Structural code
Purpose: Engineering
Licence type: Floating
Platform: Linux or Windows
Ansys, Fluent and LS-DYNA
On HPC services: Yes
Category: CFD/CAE
Purpose: Engineering
Licence type: Floating
Platform: Linux or Windows
C
CUDA
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: GPU parallel programming
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
G
GNU
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Development
Licence type: None needed
Platform: Linux or macOS
I
Intel Compilers
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Development
Licence type: Floating
Platform: All
M
Maple
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Computing tool
Purpose: Symbolic computing
Licence type: Site
Platform: All
Mathematica
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Symbolic and numerical maths
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
MATLAB
On HPC services: Yes
Category: High-level programming language
Purpose: Scientific
Licence type: Site and floating
Platform: All
MPI
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Parallel programming
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
N
NAG Library (Python and Fortran)
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Library
Purpose: Development
Licence type: Site
Platform: All
NVivo
On HPC services: No
Category: Information science
Purpose: Qualitative analysis
Licence type: Site deal
Platform: Windows
P
PGI Compilers
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Development
Licence type: Floating
Platform: Linux
Python
On HPC services: Yes
Category: High-level programming language
Purpose: Science
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
R
R Compiler
On HPC services: Yes
Category: High-level programming language
Purpose: Statistics
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
S
Salford Compilers
On HPC services: No
Category: Compiler
Purpose: Development
Licence type: Site
Platform: Windows
SAS
On HPC services: No
Category: Statistical
Purpose: Statistics
Licence type: Site
Platform: Windows
SPSS
On HPC services: No
Category: Statistical
Purpose: Statistics
Licence type: Site
Platform: Windows
T
TensorFlow
On HPC services: Yes
Category: Python library
Purpose: Machine learning
Licence type: None needed
Platform: All
Community software
For community software, we'll provide
licences
licence servers
software for different platforms. We'll also make sure that the 
software can run on different platforms
assistance for running software, where possible. This isn't 
guaranteed
updates, when requested by the research community
The Research IT support team can install software on HPC platforms at 
your request.
Software installed in shared areas on the high-performance computing 
systems must be documented by the installer on the shared 
documentation system.
Some software is available for free or at discounted prices. This can be 
installed on your workstation or Managed Windows Workstations.
See a list of software for students
Individual software
If you install unsupported software in community or user areas on the 
high-performance computing (HPC) system, we may be able to provide 
some assistance. Installation of software can't be guaranteed.
Software installed in shared areas of the HPC system must be 
documented by the installer on the shared documentation system.
Cloud computing for research
Find out how to access powerful cloud computing resources at the 
University.
Who can use cloud computing?
You can apply for research cloud computing if you’re a researcher at any 
level (including postgraduate researchers) at the University of Sheffield.
You should have a project that:
needs larger or more flexible compute than is available with 
traditional resources
and/or
needs to be hosted in the cloud
Sensitive data
Are you using sensitive data for your project, or are you concerned that 
the data you're using needs extra controls put in place around it? If so, 
read more about the Secure Data Service for more information on 
scalable cloud computing whilst using sensitive data.
Benefits
With cloud computing, you can:
spin up virtual machines of any size with both Windows and Ubuntu
pre-packaged machine images
adjust machine performance using scalable compute facilities 
create as much high security storage as you need with Amazon 
Elastic Block Store (EBS) and Amazon Simple Storage Solution (S3)
access powerful GPU resources
Costs
Cloud computing resources are paid for by the University and free for 
researchers.
User-friendly interface
You can create, manage and connect to cloud resources through RONIN, 
a user-friendly interface built on Amazon Web Services (AWS).
Find out more on the RONIN website.
Get a RONIN account
Request Research Cloud Computing
How to use RONIN
Once you have an account, you must be logged into the University’s VPN,
even if you're on campus.
1. Log in to RONIN    using your University of Sheffield login details.
2. Create your virtual machine in RONIN. Find out how to create a 
machine.
3. Access your machine. Find out how to use RONIN link.
High-Performance Computing facilities
We provide free High-Performance Computing (HPC) facilities to 
research students and all staff at the University. Find out about our 
facilities, how to gain access and security considerations to bear in mind.
Our facilities
Our HPC service is provided by two clusters: Stanage and Bessemer. 
These clusters are composed of hundreds of computers.
As well as fast number-crunching capabilities, HPC also provides 
specialist software packages that aren't normally available on University 
computers and laptops.
You can submit intensive computing tasks to these clusters, such as those
that require
hours or days of computing time
significant resource needs, such as large RAM or GPUs 
requirements, or large amounts of storage
The output from these tasks can then be viewed at your convenience. 
HPC specifications
View the specifications of the Stanage cluster
View the specifications of the Bessemer cluster
Shared facilities
The N8 Centre of Excellence in Computationally Intensive Research (N8 
CIR) recently announced a supercomputer, known as Bede.
Bede is a Tier 2, or regional, HPC. It's funded by the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).
The cluster is suitable for running machine learning and computational 
applications that need graphics processing units (GPUs).
The system can be used by researchers from N8 Research Partnership 
institutions
Durham
Lancaster
Leeds
Liverpool
Manchester
Newcastle
Sheffield
York
Your project needs to be registered and you need to fill the application 
form before requesting an account.
Fill in the Bede application form
External tier 1 and 2 facilities
University of Sheffield researchers can apply for access to specific UK 
and European HPC clusters at various times throughout the year.
These Access Calls usually specify some eligibility criteria, and require 
an online application.
The online application normally requires
a project description
project compute objective
requested resource (CPU/GPU-hrs, and/or project duration).
Learn more about current Live Access Calls.
Eligibility
You can have an account on Stanage and Bessemer if you're a member of 
staff, or if you are one of the following categories of student and you have
your supervisor's permission:
A research postgraduate.
A taught postgraduate, using the facilities for project work.
A third or fourth-year undergraduate, using the facilities for project
work.
Becoming a HPC user
Requesting access
Students
If you fit into one of the eligible categories of student, follow these 
steps to register:
1. Pass the HPC Driving Licence test.
2. Ask your academic supervisor to fill in the HPC access request 
form. This can be found on the IT Service Desk Self-Service 
Portal, under 'Service Request Forms'.
3. Once you have a Stanage/Bessemer username, you need to make 
your password the same as your normal password. Follow the 
‘Manage passwords’ link.
Staff
Staff can sign up by contacting IT help and support.
Rules for use
Once you've registered and have been given a username for the HPCs, 
you must not
share your account credentials
allow others to run jobs using your account
Any misuse of accounts will be investigated in line with the 
University's IT code of practice.
Security of data
Dealing with sensitive information
The HPC service should not be used to store or process sensitive 
information, such as
personal information
financial data
commercially sensitive or other forms of restricted data
If you need to store or process this information, discuss your 
requirements with the Research IT team via research-
it@sheffield.ac.uk.
Our security measures
The security of your data is important to us. We make every effort to 
make our HPC systems as secure as possible, within the constraints of 
running a high-performance shared service.
We have to balance building in additional security controls against the 
performance and financial costs of the HPC service.
Although we strive to make sure that we have a robust baseline of 
security that's suitable for the HPC community, we're aware that 
regulatory bodies and our research partners are asking for increasingly 
stringent security controls that the HPC may not have in place.
Extra care should always be taken when dealing with sensitive 
information.
Advice
If you're in any doubt about the sensitivity of information or how it should
be handled, contact IT help and support for advice.
Transferring files
View our HPC documentation to find out how to
transfer with SCP/SFTP   
download and upload files directly to the cluster   
Secure Data Service
Find out how to keep sensitive research data safe.
Doing research with sensitive data
If you have any concerns about the sensitivity or security of data on your 
research project, email research-it@sheffield.ac.uk to discuss this or 
book an appointment.
We can provide advice on how to complete agreements with data 
providers, and we can direct you to the most appropriate platform to host
your research project.
Secure Data Service cloud platform
The Secure Data Service maintains a secure, cloud-based platform for 
researchers working with sensitive data.
The platform is accredited to the NHS Data Protection Security Toolkit 
and certified to ISO.IEC 27001:2022. If your project requires additional 
security controls, please let us know and we may be able to help.
Who can use the Secure Data Service
You can apply for support from the Secure Data Service if you’re a 
researcher at any level (including postgraduate researchers) at the 
University of Sheffield, and you are doing research with sensitive data.
Costs
The Secure Data Service is paid for by the University and free at the 
point of use for researchers.
Data Governance Statement
The Secure Data Service provides a powerful cloud computing platform 
for members of the University, where sensitive data can be processed 
safely and securely. The Secure Data Service’s research platform is 
highly secure, compliant with NHS Data Protection Security Toolkit and 
certified to ISO.IEC 27001:2022.
The Secure Data Service team is responsible for the security of the 
research platform, however users are responsible for their conduct on 
the platform.
The Secure Data Service team is not responsible for your data - as such 
the Secure Data Service team will not sign off as a responsible party of 
any data sharing agreement, data destruction certificate or otherwise 
enter into agreements pertaining to ownership of any data on the 
platform.
The Secure Data Service can provide confirmation of activity on the 
platform, though, such as which users have access to a specific project, 
confirmation that a project has been deleted etc.
Standard research storage
We can offer 10TB of free storage for materials for your research project.
Find out about the features of the storage, whether it will work for you 
and how you can access it.
Overview
Standard research storage is free, 10TB data storage that we offer to 
research groups for storing materials during the life of a project.
The storage is centrally managed by IT Services, so your data will be
kept secure
backed up to protect against disasters and failures
Eligibility
Each research principal investigator (PI) is allowed to share 10TB of 
standard research storage between multiple projects and as many staff 
as needed.
Undergraduate and postgraduate students can use shared areas when 
access requests to a shared area owner are granted.
You should contact the shared area owner if you believe you should have 
access.
Making a request
To request the space, the principal investigator (PI), or a staff nominee, 
needs to complete an application form to give us a few basic details.
It usually takes up to three working days for your 10TB space to be up 
and running.
Request standard research storage
You will need to be connected via VPN or on the campus network to 
access the link above.
Features
Standard research storage is designed specifically to meet the needs of 
research groups.
Some of the features of the storage are explained below.
Shared team space
The shared space is accessible to all members of the research group, so 
it's ideal for collaboration and sharing of files.
Each shared space will have a space administrator, who manages the 
space. This is usually the principal investigator (PI).
The space administrator can add and remove access rights to the space 
and any folders within it. Anyone with a University account can be given 
access to shared folders.
Individual space
A personal folder is set up for each team member, within the "Users" 
folder of your research storage.
Each member can only see their own directory by default. The space 
administrator can access all personal spaces for the team.
Central management
The safety and security of research storage spaces are centrally managed
by IT Services, ensuring that all your data is secure. All of the security, 
patching and configuration is managed for you.
All personal and shared spaces are access-controlled, meaning only those
with explicit permission can view data. Access can only be granted to 
people with a University of Sheffield computer account.
External collaboration
You can collaborate with research partners who are outside the 
University by creating computer accounts for them.
File recovery
Individual files and folders can be quickly and easily recovered if they're 
accidentally overwritten or deleted.
All spaces get regular snapshots, which are copies of the storage area at 
a specific point in time. We take snapshots of each area several times a 
day, and they're retained for seven days.
Disaster recovery
Each storage area is backed up to a second data centre. This means that 
if we have a hardware problem with our storage system, such as a disk 
failure, your files are protected.
This backup copy isn't ordinarily used for recovery when a file gets 
deleted or corrupted, it's designed for use when there are problems with 
the storage system.
High-performance computing (HPC) access
You can access your research storage from the University's HPC 
facilities. When you request standard research storage for a research 
group, it can be configured to be accessible against the HPCs.
Technical details
Standard research storage is on NetApp filers. These provide over 1 
petabyte of storage.
Data is snapshotted regularly to make sure file recovery is quick and 
easy, in the event a file is accidentally deleted or corrupted.
Data is split between two physical data centres, and research storage is 
backed up between the two data centres. This gives better protection 
against hardware and networking problems.
A copy of the daily snapshots is retained for 28 days in the other data 
centre, for disaster recovery purposes.
The storage can all be accessed via SMB with any suitable client.
Alternative requirements
In some situations, you may need something different to our standard 
research storage.
We're always happy to talk through your specific requirements and 
provide you with a quote. Get in touch if
you need more than 10TB of storage. By default, we offer 10TB of 
space, so we'd need to discuss options if you need a larger quota
you need to process large volumes of data regularly. If you're 
generating a lot of temporary data, you may need less frequent 
backups or a shorter retention period for your area
you're looking for long-term archival of data
